---
layout: post
title: Goodbye Law, "Hello, World!"
---

Yesterday was my last day of work, and  hopefully the last time that I will need my bar license for awhile. By next Thursday, I will have unsettled myself and moved to San Francisco to pursue a career in software development. I’m happy to be attending a respected and accomplished program in Hack Reactor (HR), and am very much looking forward to the next chapter of my life with the support of my family and wonderful girlfriend. 

I’m more excited at the dream of working in tech for a Google, or an Amazon, or Microsoft (all who employ HR alumni) than I ever was for the prospect of working for the Sullivan and Cromwell’s and the Holland and Knight’s of the legal world. I’m more excited for the opportunity to join exciting Startups than to server partners at a boutique law firm. I’m more excited for a career as an end, than for a career as a means. Still, law has had it’s share of ups with it’s downs, and I have experiences and knowledge that I value. I’ve met many amazing people along the way (you are one of them!), and there is little regret for the path that I’ve taken (except the 6 figure loans).
Enough with the existential retrospective, this post is about the beginning of a new journey, a start of my 10,000 hours towards become the best software engineer I can be. I hope to document my journey, warts and all, for my own benefit and for that of anyone that cares to learn anything from me. I’ll probably create a Ghost blog soon for this purpose, but this medium will do for now.

## Why Software Developer and why Hack Reactor?

Software development is at an intersection of logical reasoning and creativity that I find very intellectually satisfying. The work is stimulating, the pay is good, work culture is pro-employee, and market demand is high. With the popularization and growing acceptance of coding bootcamps among the tech industry, there’s also a lower bar of entry into this field than there usually is for a lucrative and desirable career. From a lot of research, it seemed clear that Hack Reactor and Fullstack Academy are the most reputable schools in the business. Eventually, the allure of Silicon Valley and it being the tech center of the world convinced me that I needed to try to attend Hack Reactor in San Francisco. I had long had romanticized daydreams about what it’d be like to work at Google, catching some zzz’s in a nap pod before grabbing some grub from the legendary snack room, then returning to write some snazzy code at my treadmill desk. The eyebrow-raising stats of HR’s $105k average starting salary with 99% job placement in 3 months all across the industry seemed unreal, yet every person I talked to and internet review that I read seemed to corroborate that this was indeed a golden ticket - if you could get in. Despite HR’s acceptance rate of under 3% and my having zero web development experience, I was determined to pursue the glimmer of a dream that I thought extinguished long ago.

## Picking where to start

Good software engineers don’t know a few languages, they know looots of languages. However, you have to start with one, and breadth in the early going isn’t nearly as useful as depth. I initially tried to begin by learning basic syntax and control flow for Python, Javascript and Ruby at the same time, but I found that the time spent wasn’t really teaching me how to program, but just the forms of the languages. So I picked one, and it’s the same one that I will be immersively studying at HR - Javascript. Once a language bound to the browser, Javascript with Node and its well supported and open-source modules and libraries can now be used to code servers, mobile and web apps, and even video games. The journey to becoming a software engineer begins for me with learning the three basic languages of the web - HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

## What I self-taught myself to get into HR

HTML, CSS, JavaScript are the basic building blocks of website. HTML provides the basic skeletal structure of the contents of the site, and CSS provides the visual “style” for the HTML. JavaScript provides functionality and interactivity on a website, e.g., dynamically generating new HTML content, providing a button with functionality, or performing calculations on user inputs. There are a plethora of free or cheap learn-to-code resources on the internet, and I’ve made an attempt to try all of the popular ones. I attempted to learn and master the basic requirements that I thought would get me admitted to HR. Here’s what I found to be most helpful:

* Learning the basic syntax of all 3 languages through www.codecademy.com
* Learn about the box model and effective use of HTML and CSS through www.udacity.com This is my portfolio website project I built with this class: http://tinyurl.com/boyasite
* Learn JavaScript data types, control flow, loops and what’s going on “under the hood” through www.codeschool.com (JavaScript Road Trip 1 - 3, requires subscription), or www.teamtreehouse.com (Fullstack JavaScript track: lessons 1 and 2, requires subscription but offers free trial), or www.udacity.com (JavaScript Basics) if you’re cheap.
* Learn about JavaScript callback functions through Chapter 5 of “Eloquent JavaScript” http://eloquentjavascript.net/
* Learn about JavaScript recursion with this free, but hidden, codecademy course: https://www.codecademy.com/courses/...
* Practice your JavaScript programming skills with www.codewars.com (beginners should probably start with level 7 or 8 katas). After finishing an exercise, I check for the “Best Practices” answers to see how other hackers best solved the problem. I also used www.coderbytes.com and had solved all the beginner and intermediate level challenges, but now the website charges a membership a fee.

It took me about 2 to 3 months to do the above by spending a couple hours after work and on the weekends. I applied to Hack Reactor after, and was invited to an hour-long skype interview with an instructor that included a technical interview. The technical interview mostly involved demonstrating an understanding of the different data types and writing a many functions that used callback functions, many of which appear in the underscore.js library and are also native JavaScript functions described in Chapter 5 of “Eloquent JavaScript” (although there’s a couple of twists so don’t try to just memorize the syntax). I was able to complete all the functions without too much trouble, and was able to articulate my thought process as well. I was also able to keep up a cordial demeanor despite the fact that the background of the interviewer was extremely loud and distracting with a bunch of noisy hackers. Be warned! I thought it had went well but I wasn’t positive that I’d be accepted. I received an email a day or two later telling me that I had been accepted, and thus I elatedly began the HR experience. 
Next time I will post about what the precourse work has been like and cover some of the more nuanced topics I’ve learned.